I'm sorry, I've got a few, a few left loose here.
And it's very old.
They have four lots making on them, I suppose.
I'm going to see this, it used to grow a while.
No, it was in the garden.
What used to happen on, um, jacking apple night then?
Halloween.
Oh, we had a marvellous night.
The boys were dressing girls clothes.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, all kinds of things.
All dressed up, like a carnival.
Yeah.
And they used to come round, in stockings, they'd come round to the mariloui.
What's the mariloui?
A horse's head.
Oh, my.
You've heard of it?
Yeah, things were happening.
They had them in Cornwall.
They had mariloui.
And then they used to carry lights around with them.
And then they'd go to, some used to come in, and they'd have parapetries and sandwiches.
Although people had the door open, they did it.
And they'd go tap on the floor.
This is South Wales.
South Wales, North Wales, no.
North Wales is Christmas time.
New Year's Eve.
Halloween in North Wales, nothing very much.
Lottery New Year's Eve in North Wales.
You know what they used to do?
Take people's gates off.
And hide them.
And perhaps you'd live in 100, or next morning when you get up you were living in number 2, perhaps.
And then there was a search going round for the gates.
And they used to go to powerhouses.
And I'll tell you what they did in one powerhouse, and my father helped to do it.
They had, to go to the dairy, there were two steps to go down.
From the yard.
Two steps to go down.
And in the yard was a big waterbath.
And what they did, they rolled the waterbath,
and they'd pass these steps to the door to go to the dairy.
They'd put the waterbath down to leave on the door.
And they rang, banged the door, and the farmer goes up to the garden, and as he went out,
the waterbath chipped into the dairy.
And he fired off the garden.
I remember it happening.
I was about 7 years of age and my mother was furious with him.
That means you were at this place.
That would be 1905.
Yes.
No doubt you were a life-borrowers, I think, at that time.
And you'd go to people's houses and they'd have a big tub full of water and full of apples,
and there was a little man hanging.
It was a marvelous time.
And every session we'd go down the road with Mary-Louise singing.
Any kind of...
They had a special song in South Wales.
I don't know it.
They had a special song for it.
But in old Wales we always had it on New Year's Eve,
around the Christmas time that week.
All sorts of things were done.
I didn't go with my grandfather as we were curious.
You know the red gate as you go in the drive?
Yes.
I remember that gate we found in the panthorne,
across the way with the rabbit warren.
We found there lots of things belonging to other people in the little heap.
For sale.
You would see the fun they had in the country.
All customs rich.
And then, I thought, between Easter and Whitsun,
there used to be a competition, singing.
And you village come to my...
There were three or four villages together.
And they would compete.
And from the school of...
When I got from the university,
some of the musicians used to come along.
And they'd do a shooting case.
And then some band.
And then a harpist.
A real awesome violin, you know.
And they would be clogged dancing.
All sorts of things rich.
When did this die out?
Or how did that die out?
It hasn't died out in the country.
And then that was...
Then you were angry with them.
Your grandparents were on mainland.
No, we were on the mainland and my grandparents were in Andorra City.
But my father's family were up from...
Go over a little bridge.
I told you my father told me there were some little boys playing on that bridge.
There had been a king there years ago where the two just had a trowel.
They were throwing.
You know what it is?
A village up to you lean over and go over a little stone bridge.
Well now my father's family were from there.
Farmers again.
And you can see in everything else,
and you look over the water to the other side,
the bay can be seen.
Over the other side is where my father's family came from.
By the Bay of Davies.
Oh, not young.
Not young.
Not the bay with the rocks covered in them down.
No, no.
That is the one that are also on the main dam.
Here is the one that are also on the main dam.
The other side around us.
He didn't care.
What was the problem with the one that's covered in dam?
My grandfather was here in the land.
Some time ago.
Yes, probably 1860.
1850, 1850, 1860.
Well, you know, was it not...
He was with the school children.
Often up to that sort of...
Was that the school children who did that sort of thing?
Oh, in your town?
Oh, yes.
They have changed.
And you like it.
I got you a tube.
My grandmothers were there.
They were still the bankers.
The politicians, they just needed to appreciate.
You know, I got a chair.
Oh, you're not carrying on.
I got a chair with W.J. on it.
My father did that.
It was a little...
Yes, that's one of...
Whoa, whoa, whoa.
And he could do with you.
You've got that in your house, haven't you?
It's a little...
You like to have it, Steve?
A little brown carver's chair.
A little lounge chair.
It's made by...
It's been made.
It's handmade.
And the whole goodie kitchen chair.
I saw that being made.
Who brought it?
I was a little girl.
I was six or seven years of age.
I was a little later in the family again.
And you still got that...
They were all tradespeople.
And you got the cow horn.
No, my wife got it.
It was a grandmothers' look.
Sorry, I gave this one out.
It wasn't a cow horn.
It was made out of the whole thing.
It was made out of the whole...
It was a cow horn.
And afterwards I thought I should maybe give you...
The name was on it was the Choo Choo.
And it was Nell's grandmothers.
And my grandmothers.
And Stephen, I can always remember...
Going to my family's...
Dad went to South Wales to work.
Because he used to do...
Before the quarries closed...
And I can remember it...
He used to do sandals.
And all the horses here...
That was my grandfather.
Yes.
That was my grand...
My grandfather.
And when the quarries closed, he went to South Wales to work with quarry brothers.
But he didn't like the way they were doing it.
So he went to work on the quarry and not repairing.
And that was just...
He was a sadler, to be very true.
And he always made old boots and shoes.
And you know when there's a sewing machine?
Yes.
When Dad had a sewing machine of his own.
You know, a big one.
Yes.
And my mother changed it for that one.
That's what it was.
They used hogs...
Hogs and bristles for sewing.
Oh gosh!
Stephen, it was interesting.
We used to buy a bowl of something like cotton.
Now, can't tell you what a cotton was like.
You couldn't pull it like that.
It would break into pieces.
How did you tell me that you were sure?
Linen.
No, it wasn't linen.
It was a kind of...
A plaques.
You could pull it a bit.
And you'd have a hook.
On a door post.
A door post.
And it put this stuff...
I've got six or seven strands of it.
Throw it on the wrist.
And move.
And then you'd have a piece of
cobblest wax.
And especially brown.
What is cobblest wax?
Well, I couldn't tell you.
There's plaques then.
And it's called cobblest wax.
It's made of this
and then it's a shoe.
Then we'd see
the gore.
Rub it against.
And in the end, you could
pull it and it would budge.
It was a strong, strong, big...
And when he got it long enough
to do it double-series,
it was doubling up all the way up.
It was a little bit every time.
To this big, it might be.
And when he got it long enough,
it would keep sizzling.
And he did this.
He did this again.
But he didn't touch the tip of the bristle.
Into the end of the...
Into the end of this cotton, sir.
And a kind of a knot,
a special kind of knot on the other end.
And then
when he starts a shoe,
he'd say,
no, he had the...
I forget what it's called.
I used to have it.
There's so many different...
Do you remember that
it had a thick handle to it
and a little...
I think it was a name on the end.
It was Bradle.
He'd say, that is a shoe.
It was for the upper end
and for the nose.
Then what you do then,
you put a bristle on the other end
so the bristle goes in the foot
to make sure the way it's on.
Because when you buy
expensive shoes and your hands
so you can see the stitching,
have you ever noticed?
When my father could do that,
that's what he used to do.
And I tell him something else that people don't know.
When you buy leather,
when you pull leather,
a skin
for your work...
You need to buy a skin,
a lovely cow's skin,
always prepared for it.
You would cut a pattern.
You'd look at your shoe
and you'd pull the shoe and you'd cut a pattern.
And then you'd put it in a bucket of water.
Now you remember that.
And then
after a bit of talking
for about three or four hours,
he'd hammer it.
And it started off quite thick.
And he'd hammer it until it was thin.
And then he'd put it on
the shoe.
This side he'd have
a special foot
made of wood.
To this side he used to give a shoe.
And he'd put that in his leg
and he'd hammer this
nail, this leather piece
onto that.
And after a while he'd put it round
and round it all.
And he would hold grabs, he used to call them.
They were called
Brass Tyreids.
And he made a brass.
He used to make shoes
for the villagers.
These are my friends working boots
in the village.
They have a hot nail boot.
Just for the villagers
he didn't use to make any for the...
Oh, he used to make
riding boots for the quality.
Very costly little tenner length house.
For a pair of riding boots, that was expensive for most days.
Did he do any saddles?
He had a little... he had a workshop.
How short? Even workshop was in the village.
Did he do any saddles?
Yes, he could do the lots,
he could do the lots.
And then of course he would put them down
in the quarry, he'd slow down his 50%.
That's why he went to...
That's what it is today.
And this was
the time when they brought the army in
and the police into
North Wales.
Which you never hear about.
Now, I have got a book
that is in Welsh.
When I come again, I'll bring it with me
and I will tell you
what it says.
This man
lived in here a lot younger than my father
but he remembered it.
Because he was a boy
at the time when my father was a man,
married.
And he was a... this man is a...
He was one of the
lecturer in the University of Angles.
Great socialist.
Now, was he a train driver?
He sent me a book the other day
and it...
Part of his work was in it
called Some Englishman,
Socialist.
And this man speaks
about the time his father was in the
train. His dad went there,
went from the quarry
to work the quarry.
And then
on the quarry.
But he was...
He used to have skin,
lovely black shoes. He was telling me how much he put the soles on.
After his work was
sold, the sole was sold
on. He passed them into
a shoe. And I'll tell you
how the shoe was cut. It's a piece like that
and a split in the middle.
So, half run...
I could cut the shoe...
See this?
It's all the
fit and the back is cut like this.
One piece.
There's hold the brim.
Hold the brim.
The stickiness.
And see then he put the inside
of the shoe, of the
right sole. And then
he made it
into little brass...
Little brass fraddles.
Little brass tacks.
What did you used to call it?
There's a name in Welsh when I can't
tell you what it is in English.
Revers. Revers. Revers.
That's my English name.
That's English. But that's what they were called. Revers. Revers.
But
you know you're saying that before you went to
Aswells,
the quarries, this was
the...
No, this was...
Or Tendryn.
It's fine.
He said he basically
stoned people to death.
Have you got that book,
One of the few women of Wales?
Yes you have.
It's a piece from the Beal and Boat.
There's a lot in it. There's a lot to be given out.
If you ever heard
a story about the policeman
on a Sunday standing
on the behind wall? No.
I saw it! Yeah, this is it.
I must tell you this.
I've got a lot to give you.
There was a wall. Are you sure?
There was a wall, see, about this height.
Like that.
About six foot high. That way there was a garden.
Dr. Sreut of there.
Sreut of there.
Terrace of Moses.
This was in
Bethesda.
That's on the feast.
That's all I've got to say in Bethesda, isn't it?
A mile out of Bethesda.
Up on the mountain.
And Stephen, now, you stand...
There was a quarter street going that way.
The gardens of Dr.
Sreut coming level with his...
He was all in a hill.
And the policeman was a Manchester
policeman. They brought the police in, did they?
Oh, God, yes. Brought troops in.
We had the army,
the whole lot.
And I had to give you ages to have a
two-south village. He was only about five years of age.
He said,
let me black legs, he said,
in English. Black doors for the hour,
we used to show. We kids used to do it.
We were like the little Irish kids,
rich.
This was purely because of
the striking of the quarry. Oh, of course.
And then Stephen was telling you,
he was stuck underneath his what?
This, like this, see it?
Surveying the world for the village,
I wonder whether we were going to come out
because it was only...
It's a one-year tour and they're in 30th Street,
they're over. It's only one street.
And you can't run it inside streets.
Well, Steve,
stupid, stupid.
And we were on our front gate.
You've seen a picture of Little Helms, where I was told to.
We were in a front yard, watching
a train and me.
And I think my grandfather was there.
And
all of a sudden,
these two men from
coming out of the house, they'd come from the garden
very slow,
and they took the corking stone
off the top of this wall
and dropped it on the policeman's head
and he pulled it out.
Lady, that cold.
Not sure.
I remember that ever so well.
I remember it was...
You know, when my father was alive,
he used to go over there, he used to be that little
man, and he used to go over all this
and he'd try to...
And what happened about it, did they ever
catch the people?
No, they didn't. Who had done it?
Nobody's seen it.
No, of course not.
And then in Brest,
the Victoria Arms
is called.
It had a balcony
and an army officer
was leading the riot act.
Literally, the riot act?
Oh, yes, the riot act was.
There's a hell of a place in Brest
and all that for a child.
My father was arrested.
That's where we were all, George P. Puthole.
My father was arrested
because on a Sunday morning like this,
now, we've heard me talk...
They're really going to a garage, you and me
and Pete, Richard,
and I asked if they knew a family
by the name of Hughes.
Oh, yes, that was one coming out of...
Out of the Vista.
Yes.
And I wanted to find out
they were my father's family.
And they were cabinet makers
in the Vista, see, that's where they are.
And he's the furniture, Steve,
the chairs.
Chair, some applicants, you ever come see.
And...
My father,
Adrian de Llandeguy, this is the other
side of the Vista.
You know there was a wall
and a river.
Yes.
And a bridge going up, there's a village there for Llandeguy
and it was a mortal village
built by Lord Henry, where all the
black clays lived, where all the fishers lived.
Well, anyway,
there was a wedding
in this place, and
my father had been to
Abba, which was another direction altogether.
In Abba.
With a guy by his face,
and actually had been poaching.
That's what he can do, but they haven't got anything.
Can't be like that.
What were they poaching there?
Some man and a partridge had
actually been going and poaching, you see.
Who?
And, anyway,
this wedding
was in Sinner.
No, you have heard of a
person called Little Jane?
No.
My auntie Jane's daughter? Yes.
Little Jane
was married and her husband was
part of the organiser of his church
apartment, so I heard that. See?
And there was a wedding here
on Sunday morning.
One of the black clays was getting married
and he had a loan
and had a loan, carriage and pay,
and a coachman
and a footman,
and they were having a do in the castle.
But somebody went in
and fired a gun.
After carriage,
after carriage and pay, and I
I'd put on a scrone up,
I knew the man that it happened to, and his wife.
And they were really little snouts,
they didn't have something safety to them in
because they thought themselves rich.
They were black clays, and nobody bothered
with them.
Well, anyway.
What is as bad as that, if you were a black
clay, twenty years later, you'd be...
If you were a black clay, now I'd tell you
about black clays in the Ronda.
I'd seen a man march through the street with a
white shirt on because he's a black clay.
In Hermes Street.
The men would just...
Just shun the...
Just take them to Coventry. Yes, yes.
The whole family. He was march
through, and the family was shunned.
And I was going to tell you,
they shot at this carriage and pay,
and I don't know whether the man was...
What happened?
But anyway, the police
were going around the village, wanting to find out
there were certain people, and they came to my mother
apparently, and he asked,
the police asked, where is your husband?
And she said, he's out.
And of course, they called it in.
Everybody that were out that
morning, and they were
quarreling from the po... and they were
strikers. They were arrested.
They were put under arrest.
My father was put under arrest.
But I knew my grandfather got him out.
And Lord George's
brother,
William George, was
the solicitor in Bangor.
And he was seen by my father and his
mates-off. Because they weren't
anywhere near, but they knew what was going to happen.
That's why...
They were on the other side because they were
ringleaders. And they didn't
want the ringleaders to be caught.
Because my father could run
like a grey helmet, if you want to understand.
I made a bunch of all these things.
Oh, they came so...
Good Lord,
George, come to your father's house.
Well, of course he did.
Because we're trying to
mention years afterwards in the hotel in
Kendrington Race, there was an election
on. And I'll tell you now, you know
the people who
owned Brownsea Islands
Castle and that,
apparently, was in Liverpool.
Well, now, very suddenly, Lord
Kendring George was sitting as a liberal
candidate for admission.
And I was staying at the classroom
in the hotel and I worked there.
And one of the
waitresses said to them,
she can speak Welsh.
We're going to have to speak Welsh together.
And
Nathan-Lord George turned around and she said,
I mean, well, picture can I?
And I said, yes.
And she said, did they know what we were talking about?
And she said, well, where are you from?
And I said, well, I said, my mother and father
now were in South Wales.
And they said, well, I've been here
for a long time.
And Lord George looked back and he said,
will you look back?
He said, yes, yes.
Who were you then when I tried
to tell them?
And I told them about my
father being arrested
and he was got him locked in a fort
and he was locked.
And he was left. He was always going to set him up.
How old was Lord George then?
50?
William or C.N. Mann?
And then there's William again
in How I Come to Pleas William.
I was in
the court of the care in 10th year though.
I'm not sure if you can remember.
It was early
in the
late 1920s
or 1938.
And Donald
Sattel just sent me an order
with a phone call
and I said,
I'm going to set up a
table
with six guests
and
I'm going to get them to the clock.
The rest of the people had their lives
on. I said, what clock?
I'm going to get a big table.
And I said, it's old.
And then
I went to the court for 50 and he said,
I don't believe
in the deal
and I don't believe
in the others.
So I thought we might as well
set him up.
He said, go and get
the place.
Go and get it.
I was six years ago.
And all this
back to the time you met
Lord George?
I said, I'm going to meet Ben
and I'm going to join in.
They were having coffee.
I said, come on, bring your cat.
And then
I said,
Stephen,
we live in the city.
Go to parties.
His wife is a Norwegian.
Very, very nice.
I said,
I'll be waiting at the clock.
And she said, it's my husband there yet.
I said, I'll have a car to catch him.
No, I'll be caught
in the same place.
He said, yeah.
If you can't, don't let him come home, will you?
Because he'd only be in a fit condition
and when he would come in, I'd say,
start the car, you'll need a car.
I said, come on, sit down, have a cup of tea.
Was he like his father?
No, no.
He was a real comedian.
He was
full of pen.
He was full. Although he was an MP
for Tedrosha, he wasn't.
He enjoyed life.
He enjoyed himself.
And I said,
my mom is here, but I'm going to go to the gym.
Then I'm asleep.
Day number four.
Right.
I can't go to the party stairs, I said.
I'll hold you now and I'll take you off.
And I took her to the
headquarter.
She jumped into my hand.
My friend here is not so very well.
Aren't you, sir?
She don't call me that.
She swears at me.
And I said, come on, John.
I was taken to the number four bedroom.
I went to bed, I took his shoes off.
John is going to do his collar, take his tie off
and keep it by his hands.
And we leave him there.
He'll knock the door, and we'll clean the door.
I never saw him
going in the morning. He'd have gone.
And I'm at
12 o'clock.
There was a shop called the Candy.
Did you ever see where they made handmade
chocolates?
There was a box full of chocolates and a five pound
note came over.
In those days, a five pound note, they had to go
to 30 quid today, at least.
That was again, a late 30 quid.
I met some marvelous people.
I met Sir John Simon,
the home secretary.
And his wife.
And his two daughters. And he's got a son.
And Admiral
today
with a funny name.
I can never remember his name.
But in
year one,
the quarries were closed.
Eventually,
eventually, he broke the strike, didn't he?
Oh, yes.
Just stalled people out.
One night, my family told me
a thousand men
were in conquestation
going to various parts of the world to work.
A lot went
to Pennsylvania.
Because there were quarries
and coal mines in Pennsylvania.
A lot
went to Scranton.
Because there were steelworks there.
You see now the industry was taken out of
Wales.
This crowd had
been only there.
They had investments, haven't they, you see, Rich?
They found out
what was going on.
Because my father...
You know I got
on a manken piece, a little brass square
ahead of the house.
It had something to do with building.
And you know there's a chapel
in the village. I showed you that
my father's uncle was the man that built
that chapel.
That is Carmel?
Yes, Carmel in
Cathernbury.
And then Richelle
And they were all houses of David and just like how the sun could be hot, thought again,
built a village there.
So he built it and then he went bankrupt and he went to New Jersey.
What's the only link between the quarries in the Testa on the Sloan side with the quarries
on the far side?
Handberist side.
No, not handberist.
Yes, that's what the railway is.
Of course it is.
That's it.
They were all owned by?
No, they weren't.
They were owned by, ah, which head is the name?
I've got to give them a little swing, no.
Harry, Ducks and Pearls.
Ducks.
Michael, Michael Ducks.
Ducks and Pearls, they're still about now, yeah.
They're the same family again.
And they linked up, did they?
They linked up.
They linked up, yes.
Oh, yeah, so one didn't pay any more than the other one did.
Quite right.
And then I'll tell you something else, no.
You heard Lady Diana Maners?
Yes.
She was 90 the other day.
That's right, but caught on a car accident.
That's right.
Well, no, I'll tell you something else.
Her sister married Marcus Sandresi, who was the father of this blessing mother.
I remember this meeting here on top of the tower.
Yes, yes.
And he said, the finest scenery in Wales here.
I have been up here before, and I said, which maybe, maybe things.
That's a bit of a...
It's a good bit of luck, but I've not seen anything of it.
Because my father was...
It was for free then, if you could pay.
A penny.
But isn't it English?
Scottish don't belong on square.
Those were the house customers.
So it was free.
And it went to...
And I tell you, Harry, how I used to come to go there.
My father...
Now, I showed you in Canberra PG a little shop, and I said, my father had a cobbler shop there years ago.
Oh, yes, on the left-hand side.
That's right.
Near Farnes Station.
That's it.
Well, my father had a little shop there, went on for the whole nine years.
And see Richard, that was a head, a lot of the quarry men from Campiades was free.
You should go there.
Campiades quarry men quiet.
Was he better off than the average quarryman?
Oh, yes.
You were basically, you were the...
About the second row in the bank.
That's it, that's it.
No, the third, I don't know, the farmers were the...
No, the farmers would have been better off...
The calm laborers would have been worse off than the quarrymen.
And then the quarrymen.
And then the lower tradesmen, in a sense.
And then the family would tell you how in the village, in the handicap, that in the
nest they were represented of, they were the undertakers and cabinet makers of the village.
Now, you remember the old register that I sold?
Yes.
Now that was made by them.
That was even at the polling church.
Yes.
And then you know the Grand Palace, you don't remember the Grand Palace clock.
I do remember the Grand Palace clock.
The Grand Palace clock was at the back of the dresser.
And it was taken out to make a case for the clock.
Well, the clock...
That is why you had, at the back of the dresser, you had an ordinary cheap quarter worth.
That's right, that's right.
It was impressive.
Coming across, look, in those days, even though people were very poor, when somebody died,
you had to have, obviously, a very ornate funeral.
Oh, yes.
So how did people pay for it?
They paid the money, but they...
I'll tell you what they made.
No.
This is something for you to remember, Stephen.
If you might get this to really your career, when there was a funeral in the village, or
anywhere, out there would be a committee formed.
They'd take our socials down.
But how does it really take care of it?
At the day of the funeral, Stephen, a man would sit outside the door with a dead person.
Because the whole village got involved.
The whole village got involved.
And he'd have a basin in front of it, a white cloth, had to be a white cloth on the table,
a basin on it, and a white cloth on the basin.
And as you went, you passed, you put a couple of coffers in, you were shilling in, got your
six-pence in, and when the basin was full, it gave you to the dead person's life, or
to the dead person at the table, you know, and that.
But, you know, you're saying that, like that, and literally they took you down to the family's
town.
Yes.
The family really didn't get involved at all.
No, no, no.
Not at all.
Now, Irene Dramal, my mother had a trench in Hughes.
Her husband died in Abercannon, with pneumonia.
And he drove from the south way to Begherie, back to the north way, from the south way,
and it didn't cost her a penny.
Why is that?
Because we all corrected for it.
In the street?
Right from the village to a couple of villages.
Oh, this is for you under South Wales.
And I'll tell you something.
My granny, Nell's mother, had a sister, Auntie Grace, who was serving long was the Captain
Jones.
I showed her his grave.
Yes, in Flanbigh, Keechie, Cherokee.
That's right.
One coat, not one coat in the lot.
No, but he was not down by a train.
He went on a lever crossing, and he noticed him through.
He was on a van, I forget the name, but it was called George.
Keechie, we used to be on the same boat.
We were on the same boat, yes.
We were on the same boat.
One of his sons, I know, is a fine count of Cherokee, in Brady.
Or what?
Triad.
Just want to tell you something.
I can remember Auntie Grace saying, and now we're telling you when this happened, I can
remember.
I remember when the Captain was still there on the island, and the man was there, they
paid the undertaker and all his senses to kill him.
And then they would go round to the city and see his family, all the money, and he figured
he made another collection in the clear of the lot.
So they started from scratch.
And the woman didn't have, there was no intention, she went on the...
Parish.
On the parish.
What about now, before that death, what about births when a baby was born?
There wasn't anything like that happening, no.
There was just, there was a lot of births.
Yes, a lot of children.
A lot of children dying.
Yes.
What about marriages?
Haven't you got a couple that married?
No.
That was a do.
All the villages trimmed up and flags, you know, I think for a carnival, we were that.
And everybody went, I can't remember my number, when you lay tables in a chapel, in
the Khamar Chapel history, there were a chapel people.
And a big two worlds contributed to all the wedding reception.
Oh.
And everybody went to their own house.
A house ready for them.
How was that ready?
It was ready to go quarry again.
It can be quarry committee.
If all the houses were quarried, what happened then?
They were always empty houses.
Oh, I see.
My grandfather, Richard Jones.
Did they actually buy their own houses?
I can remember Stephen, my grandfather, Richard Jones.
Who would be rented out of it?
Oh, they were rented houses, because they were all quarry houses, you hear it.
I'll tell you something.
My grandfather, as you know, father Richard Jones, came to that country during the living
and he saw a whole row of cottages.
Everyone empty.
And he wanted to open building walls.
In having all those walls that were there now.
And he went to the state agent in Pantagai and he said, how much do you want for those
20 houses?
So I think it was 20 houses.
10 houses.
2 pounds each, right, he said.
I only want the stone.
The rest, he said, I want some size so you can have.
All great, so much.
Because they're lovely, very interesting.
2 pounds each?
He got 2 pounds each for the stone and he cried away.
Because it took weeks and weeks and weeks.
What work year was this, roughly?
2010.
What about, how much was the rent then?
How much was the rent then?
Half a grand each.
What is that?
So you can easily pay for a house in 2 pounds per house.
Because the house we lived in was our own house.
And my grandfather told me for 100 pounds, he gave me one to sell to Richard.
And you know the house.
That was a lot of money.
100 pounds, really considerate of 1939, 3,400.
Anyway, it was villa time.
He didn't buy anything?
Yes.
Perfect.
Come on.
You can hardly believe this has happened.